---
layout: post
title:  "A Falsifiability Perspective on Spinoza's Positive Beings"
date:   2022-12-08 16:15:21 +0300
categories: jekyll update
---
> 1. 	“Nothing exists of which it cannot be asked, what is the cause, or reason, why it exists. [...] Since existing is something positive, we cannot say that it has nothing as its cause[...]. Therefore we must assign some positive cause, or reason, why [a thing] exists[.]”
 
  >> Baruch Spinoza, The Expositor of Descartes, in The Collected Works of Spinoza,  
 	vol. I, ed. and trans. Edwin Curley, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985. p. 246.

> “Ex nihilo, nihil fit”. Starting from the Pre-socratic philosophers, many natural philosophers have stated matter as the cause of matter. Thales, water; Anaxagoras, apeiron … Until Plato or Socrates, the question is what or which matter, not why is it matter? Which then we see idea as the starting point of matter, as it is in all religions and Hegelian dialectics. The question that hides the underlying reason for this change in thought process is when and how did this change in thinking happened? Naturalistic observation and process ended with Democritus as far as Ancient Greece is concerned. This can be linked to the falsifiability hypothesis of Karl Popper actually. Fire, water, air or any kind of substance or positive thing can be examined by the naked human eye and some logical thinking process. However, the idea of atom would not be falsifiable until the discovery of protons which happens circa 17-18th century. The emptiness or incontinuibility on this naturalistic inquiry led to a pseudosience which we call metaphysics after Aristotle. 

> To deconstruct the phrasing of Spinoza, we first need to understand the debate between Ghazzali and Ibn Rusd. In Tahafat-ul Felesefe, Ghazzali argues against the idea of eternal being and existence. This question actually rises from the main question which Spinoza answers above in essence, however, to deconstruct, it will be better to come from the other way. Spinoza gave an answer to the question “Can nothing cause a thing?”. Islamic philosphers, taking their roots from Aristotle, adopted a kind of Theleological-Cosmological argument. In essence, inferring that infinite causal relationships are impossible, being experienced from their subjective observations. As an answer to Ibn-Rusd, Ghazzali defends creation and that god created the things. However, this is the point where Spinoza and Ghazzali seem like contradicting, but actually agreeing upon. God is mostly interpreted as the sublime being, but a being nonetheless which is not of our dimensions; infinitely strong, wise… The contradiction at first glance, rises from the definitions of God of Spinoza and Ghazzali; in Spinoza there is no medium which is not God. Ghazzali, even though becomes more mystic as he ages, is basing his saying upon the myth of creation, that at some point nothing turned into being. This shallow analysis, shows this difference: Ghazzali states that the cause of thing is nothing which is induced by a thing, or the sublime thing; being; however, Spinoza, without any enforcement or outside effect, states that a thing is the cause of the thing. Deconstruction changes this point of view, Ghazzali in essence states that the cause of a thing is a thing; god, who wanted that nothing should exist, even though how problematic this sounds, until a thing existed; and in Spinoza everything is being and everything is in being. The structure and the periphery of being is not well defined or understood, it is not inferrable. With this observation, Spinoza, Aristotle, Plato and Ghazzali in essence say the same thing, a positive thing is caused by a positive thing.

> We are overseeing a great point in this inference though, what is existing and what is positive should first be examined. One of the main points in this examination lies in the causality arguments of materialists and idealists. Materialistic causality relies upon continuous back to back observation of a phenomenon, which is then put into physical theorems and goes through the process of scientific method. We rotate around the sun, and until the deviation of the orbit of Mars is observed, the explanation of Newton was more than enough, due to physical observations and me not flying into the space, we can infer that there exists a force which holds things together. So materalists, construct and redefine their theses only upon the change of observation, doesn’t matter if they are Popperian or Kuhnian. However, idealists, who are generally mathematicans and not scientists, state that causal relationship is a necessary condition and not a verifiable one; the reason why I know what is causality is that causality as an idea exists before it becomes a type of causal relationship, whatever it turns out to be. So, someone who says that a thing is the cause of a thing; which is basically a materialist; can also not infer that causality is continuous in all relations between things, due to the fact that not all relations are observable, which in return means that causality doesn’t need to hold until we know it is observed and not falsified, which is also impossible because truthability is not a metric, but falsification is; but if a thing is the cause of nothing this is not falsifiable, because it is not observable. Here we see the main problem and the solution given to this by Baruch Spinoza: creating a non-contradictory theory, which internally doesn’t lead to any questions about the “outside” or the nothing, because theory doesn’t include nothing. An understandable position, but not encapsulating nonetheless.

> To deconstruct Spinoza, there is one last part in his saying, after which we will analyse idealists and will give an encapsulating solution to the contradictory positions. This point lies on words “asked” and “positive”. Positive and negative is widely used in debates about matter. Because, we don’t know what is nothing, we just infer that nothing exists because there are things. Before the asked part, we must delve deeper into the materialistic and idealistic causality. Positive and negative in essence is due to observation. Everybody has felt hot or cold at some point; and even if I am not both right now, I know these exists and these have positive and negative relationships. Hot is the positive, due to excess heat; and cold is the negative; due to the absence of heat. So negation, negate and negative are in essence what we lack and positive is what is confirmed and observed mostly. The problem in this part rises from the excess usage of positive and negative. We will take two examples of this usage and then analyse Spinoza’s usage. Positive-negative attitude and positive-negative response. Positive attitude is due to societal norms mostly considered as being kind towards people, caring for others, having empathy and such… However, the negative attitude is not just the absence of positive attitudes. Because absence of positive attitudes doesn’t make one a psychopath; one cannot empathize much, but not to the level at which there is no empathy. Which is in essence the lack of empathy and not the negation of it, because we defined positive as the utmost level. On the other hand, positive response and negative response are inferred easily. Either the response is yes or not; any response in between falls into one category. This is where linguistically we have problems. Being and emptiness are like positive and negative response. There is a bold difference, we exists; because we are, non-existence cannot be inferred by the existent. This is the usage which Spinoza uses, I am, then there is “not i am”; which then he infers that “i am” is the necessary condition for one to create a sentence; thus “not i am” is not meaningful, it simply cannot be uttered. 

> The much deeper problem lies in his usage of “asked”. As he uses in his argument, one can only ask about what there is and not about what there is not. What is, why is, or how is nothing cannot be asked. Because just when we use nothing as the noun, or even attribute a word to the negation of “being” or “things” we sense around us, we objectify and encapsulate which doesn’t exist with what there is. So logically speaking we actually can infer about nothing, because it is the representation of nothing which is a thing. What is nothing? It is which is not a thing. This dichotomy of representation and “real”, even though how real can nothing be, creates the loophole which Spinoza uses. Any materialist should directly stop using the word nothing, there only is thing and no more. That’s why even if how well Spinoza’s symbolic logic seems, symbolic logic is only in between things, and not of which is and which isn’t. 

  > We have seen that anyone who uses nothing, to prove that thing is caused by a thing, gets into a loophole; due to the fact that usage of nothing is the representation of nothing which in essence is a thing. So what they do is direct symbolic logic, with no inquiry about the definitions and just the axioms.
	
  > What is to be done lies upon what was said around 2500 years ago by Parmenides and Herakleitos. “The thing exists” and that “change is the sole thing that doesn’t change”. Parmenides leads to a non-contradictory materialism or idealism; whether atheistic or theistic doesn’t matter. The thing exists and no further can be inquired, because we are and so as we are we only exist and are in the medium of the existing; thus any further inquiry is metaphysical or unreal. Or with Herakleitos we can construct a conforming society as such Nietzsche’s ubermans do live in. Change is the only thing that doesn’t change; everything moves; at every second a thing causes another thing to change. If change is the only thing that doesn’t change though, can’t we construct an eternal universe. Things changed as time moved on, so things have changed in the past. But always, being changes into another form of being, which by our assumption leads us back to where Aristotle started, can there be infinite causal relationships. But, we just assumed change is the only constant; so there can be no time when change was non-existent. This then leads us naturalistic philosophy, only inquiring upon what we can, with what we are given and what we can falsify. Spinoza have constructed a system in which he proved that things are the cause of things, rejecting the nothing, the nothing as the representation of nothing, in the meantime. The main issue, as we have seen, lies beneath the acceptance of nothing as a representation which has shown with deconstruction that using nothing in any way, assumes the knowledge and existence of it; which in essence is contradictory due to existence and nothingness being negations of each other, as their representations are compared.
  
>> Arda Ertug